[Music]
ralph paul welcome to the show man i am
super excited to talk to you i'm really
excited to be here it's going to be a
lot of fun i think all right so for
people that don't know who you are
you're a globally recognized macro
investor master investor as well uh
co-founder of realvision but if you
don't mind just walking people through
uh a quick synopsis and for anybody
um that isn't used to me talking about
finance and cryptocurrency i am just on
a mission to get people to understand
what i think is happening now which is
uh
i've heard you use these words and you
are a far better person to listen to
than me uh but that there's a massive
wealth transfer happening right now that
gives people who have traditionally been
disenfranchised a chance to get in so
everybody even though um you know this
is sort of beyond the scope of my
traditional mindset conversations i
think it's one of the most important
conversations to be had right now so
with that ralph if you don't mind giving
us the background that'd be amazing yeah
i'm going to give you a background about
me and why i got into crypto as well as
that's kind of where we're going with
this conversation so my background was
30 i'm 31 or two years financial markets
so i grew up in that world i grew up in
the world of what is known as macro
investing macro investing is when you
look at all the asset classes everywhere
around the world so bonds equities
commodities currencies
um credits all of these things and you
try and look for what is the best return
you can get
maybe that's in india maybe it's in
china maybe it's in the u.s so that's
the mindset we have this
3d ever-evolving jigsaw puzzle in our
heads of the world driven by the global
economy hence why it's called macro
because it's macroeconomics so it's
driven by the business cycle trends of
the global economy so i did that i was
on the sales side for many years
i ended up at goldman sachs where i
started and ran the hedge fund sales
business in equities and equity
derivatives my whole career basically
had been getting to know the world's
most famous hedge fund managers from
kind of 1990 to 2000
it was like being taught acting by
robert de niro or you know
lawrence olivier and he's ridiculous you
know my my daily calls would be stan
drucker mullet paul tudor jones you know
the guys at soros et cetera et cetera et
cetera
so that was it plenty of crises and
exciting stuff happened over that period
very macro then i decided to make the
switch in 2000 i saw the recession was
coming and i wanted to invest and make
money from it so i moved to one of my
biggest clients which was the biggest
hedge fund firm in europe at the time
called glg partners and i started and
ran the global macro hedge fund there so
that was now me taking these bets
on a global basis over that kind of very
rocky period of 2000 2001 2002 2003 in
2004 then i decided i had enough and i
moved to the mediterranean coast of
spain um and started writing
macroeconomic research i've been around
the hedge fund business longer than most
people at that point and i had a huge
amount of experience both in knowing all
of the players and also being a player
myself so i started writing from that
perspective
macroeconomic research called the global
macro investor which i still write 17
years later
and that's read by most of the world's
most famous hedge fund managers
sovereign wealth funds asset managers
that kind of stuff a really privileged
position
and it's that privileged position that
got to me where i am today why i started
real vision and why crypto because
they're all part of the same thing
so there i am 2007 and i'm thinking the
world is about to fall apart and i'm
writing about it
and you know i'm one of the people that
was
you know on the right side of that and a
lot of the people in the film the big
short were clients of mine and we all
kind of knew what was going on
the world falls apart
tons of people make tons of money out of
it tons of people lose their entire
livelihoods
this is not good
and it's not
and so i started asking the question
because people come up to me in the
street
and say
why didn't we know
and i'm thinking yeah why did i know
well fine i've got a lot of experience
and i managed to piece together the
jigsaw puzzle
but why does nobody else get to know
this knowledge
this was wrong
and this was the rise of occupy wall
street this is the rise of the anger of
we're being screwed somewhere we don't
know how we're being screwed
and i re i believed in that too
then i was in europe for 2012.
we almost lost our entire banking system
plus the eu itself
i remember having to go buy a generator
and dried food because i thought we were
going to follow
cyprus and we were going to lose the
banks
over one weekend we would have lost the
banks on monday the imf forced spain
into taking an 18 billion dollar bailout
which rescued it in time then eventually
we end up with this draggy i'll do
anything you know that it takes to stop
europe falling apart essentially and
that stopped the tide
but the same thing happened i was at the
epicentre of it i knew it was coming
we all made money out of it
and everybody around me and i was
yelling to everybody listen you've got
to be careful you know friends of mine
got destroyed in that in spain the
property market imploded everybody's a
real estate developer you know everybody
got killed
friends went bankrupt and they were like
why didn't we know and first i'm like i
have been telling you this endlessly
but because i wasn't on television at
the time they don't take you seriously
i'm like it's bizarre you know i write
stuff that the world's most famous
investors
read but if i'm not on television
for an average guy i don't have
credibility right i'm like okay
i at that point started having two
tangents which is realizing i need to do
something about it
that this this disparate information
level that one group has everything
everybody else has nothing
and the other thing is i needed to make
the world safer because we're kind of
screwed
because of this over financialization
all the debt that we could lose the
system at any point nothing had gone
away the printing of money was just a
way of wallpapering over the cracks
that the the
earthquake earthquake left behind
so i'm like okay what can i do so the
idea i had with a bunch of people was
trying to set up the world's safest bank
um and i tried to go and do that it was
slightly arrogant or stupid probably to
try to do because it's not easy
and we got together quite an amazing
group of people still we tried in
singapore we tried in switzerland we
tried in the us we tried it was just
hard to do
the system is not there for you to try
and change
and so in that process a friend of mine
one of my uh
clients tapped me on the shoulder and
said you should take a look at bitcoin
this was 2012. and i've been aware of
bitcoin and i took a good look at it
and he explained to me both
the store value proposition
and the blockchain element that anything
could be trusted on the blockchain
i looked at this and i'm like oh my god
this is the future that we need because
the problem we've got is when a firm
like lehman brothers goes bust nobody
knows who owns what and somebody's going
to get screwed in that equation just one
of the very issues at the center of the
system nobody knows who owns anything
so i started looking at that and i wrote
i started writing articles and invested
in it first time in 2013.
2014 i started real vision because i
wanted to democratize the very best
financial information
nobody gets access for an hour to the
world's most famous hedge fund managers
unless you've
invested 100 million dollars real vision
changed that equation entirely and said
listen forget all these sound bites on
cnbc in three minutes it's worthless
we're going to give you an hour of the
world's most successful investors the
best independent analysts and
strategists
and then you have a level playing field
and that was a game changer i mean since
real vision starts in 2014 there's
probably been 200 podcasts that's copied
that model
so this is this movement there's two
things there's the democratization of
information
and then there's crypto so
crypto as it starts building out as an
ecosystem
you start to realize that
okay this is now the fastest adoption
of any technology in all recorded human
history
dude you have to say that again this is
this is the idea that's gotten me
obsessed with you with crypto is
you talk about
how there's something broken we're
getting screwed and we don't understand
where
and
now this new thing has come along but
it's it's entering the system at a
moment where it's sort of peak distrust
and peak sort of throwing your hands up
you're giving up you tried occupying
wall street it didn't work
uh you tried
donald trump you've tried voting and joe
biden you've tried everything and
nothing changes so hit people with that
quote again because this is something
that and i'll i'll give my background
for people that are hearing me talk
about this stuff for the first time in a
minute um but but that quote about this
being the fastest adopted technology i
think is important the internet
from 1990 to 2000 grew at 63 a year
that was the fastest adoption of any
technology in all recorded history prior
to that
mobile phones
was the other one
but what happens is the internet
technology and the mobile phone
technology allows for these
networks to be built
and once that network's in place it's
faster to build the net next network so
in india for example they've just
basically given out free data to every
mobile phone in india so guess what
uh data usage is the highest in the
world
and so their internet scaling becomes
faster
so this so the internet was huge as we
all know and it remains huge so at 63 a
year it then flattened out over time as
more and more people got adopted
so at 1997 it was growing at 63 a year
and it was 140 million users of the
internet
in 2021 there are 140 million crypto
users
and it's growing at 113
a year
double the speed now this is where
humans struggle linear numbers and
exponential numbers
because it's exponential
it means that growing at 113 a year
we're going to go from 140 million
people to a billion people by 2024
i mean so
so
so when you go back
and what you how are you introduced all
of this so if you know
that something is being adopted at this
speed and it's a networking of money at
its core
and you can buy an infinitesimal
fraction of it so everybody can buy 10
of their net worth
then everybody who takes this
opportunity will probably have the
biggest opportunity
in history the other part that i want
people to understand is that it's also
coming at a moment where somebody like
you no longer has to convince a
gatekeeper to let you on tv
that you can just spin something up
because the other part of this equation
is what i'll round to youtube so it
isn't exactly youtube but it's that idea
that you can put out this long form
content that's video that
allows people access to ideas and
information that they never would have
had before
and
getting people to
see that
you're now moving into a new phase where
you and i i think share a similar sense
of like okay entrepreneurship was very
good to me it changed my life it made me
fantastically wealthy and now i'm
looking around going hey there's nothing
that special about me the thing that
made me successful is i'm a relentless
learner so i'm just unafraid to
embarrass myself to fall down to look
stupid and because of that while other
people are laughing at me i'm laughing
on the inside cause i'm like
[__] on a long enough timeline
i'm gonna win because i'll learn and
i'll figure this stuff out
so now you get a group of people like me
who succeed tremendously in a system
where i'm looking around watching
everybody else struggle and i'm like i
will tell you everything i know like
i'll just give it out as fast as i
[__] can because i want to live in a
world where other people can rise up for
whatever reason i i just am emotionally
incentivized to also see other people
succeed and so you're now in a position
where someone like you who who
essentially
could have retired you know lives on
this tropical beautiful island and like
does not need to be doing all this
reengages with the world and tries to
give people that information and so you
get this
good
i did a piece that's probably the most
viewed piece i've ever done on youtube
it's like i don't know two million two
three million views called the
retirement crisis
and it resonated because i i kind of
showed how people and people haven't
seen it check it out on youtube it's
well worth your time and it's a long
time ago it predicts a lot of what's
going on now
and um
the point being
is that there's a bunch of retirees the
baby boomers and they've kind of screwed
it all up because they've got all the
debt um they've got too much equity
exposure
it's really hard for them to retire this
is why the federal reserve don't like
equities going down because you've got
this richest
group on earth who are kind of stuck
they never got enough money to retire on
but i want to look through the eyes of
the millennials
so they are at 32 years old
at the same age their parents at 32 the
baby boomers had all-time cheap
valuations of equities all-time cheap
bonds all-time cheap credit all-time
cheap property
right so they couldn't help but make
money they kind of screwed it up because
they actually ended up going into debt
as well
but they couldn't help but make money so
then the millennials had the opposite
all-time record valuations equities
all-time record valuation for bonds
all-time record credit all-time record
highs in property so i'm like these guys
are screwed unless something else comes
along and that thing is crypto
because the future expected return of
crypto it's been growing at 213 a year
in returns i that's how much it makes
even though it's very volatile sometimes
it's down 70
over time you're making 213 a year it
has grown as an asset it's gone up i
think it's two million percent since
inception no other asset in all recorded
history has ever done this and we
haven't even started i still think
there's probably another 100 x from here
not even the baby boomers got given that
the s p didn't go up 100 x since 1980.
so
this is the magnitude of what's there so
i'm screaming from the rooftop saying
you might be cynical you might think you
don't understand it you might think
you can't afford to play in this
but you have to listen because this is
the opportunity you can't come back to
me in 10 years time and say well we
missed all of that all the rich people
got richer no you i everybody else is
saying now is your time don't be
irresponsible you know dollar cost
average do all the right things but here
is your opportunity
this is the biggest opportunity i've
ever seen and i'm gonna take advantage
of it and so should everybody else this
is not rich or poor this is an every
person opportunity and we've never had
this before ever
dude you just gave me like sustained
chills
this is not rich or poor this is an
opportunity for everybody but you really
have to move on it so i'll tell my own
story so for anybody that is uh pushing
back feels late to the party whatever
find some solace in my
like willful ignorance so i have always
seen myself as good at making money and
terrible at investing money now you have
to be very careful what story you repeat
about yourself to yourself and i just
kept saying that like i'm i didn't want
to focus on learning about money math
doesn't come easily to me i don't like
whatever that ability is to
conceptualize numbers i don't have it so
it's like i really struggle with that
stuff
and one of my employees was like tom are
you looking at crypto and i'm like david
i'm just not interested in investing
like it's not it doesn't speak to me at
all
and and he just kept coming back like
tom you really need to look at this you
need to look at this and i'm like david
how many times i have to say like i
don't find this interesting i want to
build a company and i'll make yeah i've
already made myself wealthy i'll
continue to generate wealth and help
other people by building this company
i'm not going to look at it
and then
i had been introduced to the idea of
digital scarcity about six years ago
and i thought ooh that's going to change
my business and then but the technology
wasn't there and so or i should say the
networks weren't there and i promptly
ignored it and then when it popped back
up at the beginning of 2021 i was like
i'm all in because i i understood what
it was going to be
so i start researching nfts the
technology behind it and that inevitably
leads you to the blockchain of course
which then leads you to crypto which
then i was like wait a second
what like this is literally somebody is
essentially going hey you know all those
things that make gold like this
wonderful store of value we're now
moving that onto computers and so i've
been saying for years technology is a
one-way street i'm a total like
techno-optimist there is no going
backwards like this only moves forward
so now it's like wait people are
digitizing money and then the poor david
who had been telling me for god knows
how like eight months that i needed to
look at it i was like what the hell so i
start researching hardcore about what it
is and i'm like wow
not only do i have a
fiduciary responsibility to myself and
my family to learn about this
i now felt absolutely compelled to tell
people one simple thing
research it you may decide that it
doesn't make sense because i don't think
i'm smart enough for people to listen to
me i i do think that you're smart enough
for people to listen to you and you're
certainly educated
but even if they reject it like
there is this moment of you pull back
the curtain and you see the wizard of oz
and you're like oh my god this is going
to change
everything and it's it's like a dime
drop on
how it works
and that's when i was like whoa i have
to move on this and i have to tell
everybody so like you i'm screaming from
the rooftops i just don't know how to do
it as intelligently and what's what gets
worse about this is this affliction this
crypto affliction we all get right the
rabbit hole as it's known you start with
understanding money
which most of us don't think about then
you kind of understand how we're getting
screwed by central bank printing
and the debt-laden economy and what it
means
and then you start saying okay but
that's bitcoin and then what's this
ethereum business
and then you start realizing
decentralized finance you're like it's
kind of a finance thing but that's kind
of cool because i can get yields now you
know i can get instead of getting zero
on my bank account for my hard savings i
can now get six percent a year wow
that's a difference it's like going back
25 years in time
and then suddenly nfts come
and community tokens
and suddenly your mind is completely
blown that this is not just money it's
the entire exchange
transfer and storage of value
for the internet
whole business models are about to
change
massively because of what this
technology
unlocks and then once you get your head
around that you're like oh god i can't
even hold this in my mind any longer
it's so big
and that it's not just buy some bitcoin
i'm going to make some money over time
you know it's actually an entirely
parallel financial system
and business structure
for the world and it's being adopted
faster than anything we can ever imagine
so walk people through what is it and
let's start with bitcoin because i want
to take cares to differentiate between
bitcoin and ethereum um and i guess full
disclosure to anybody listening my uh i
invest in essentially three things
bitcoin ethereum and chain link i i'm a
use case maximalist i guess
and i understand those three i'm not
saying they're the only three i'm saying
they're the only three i understand well
enough to invest in um
what is it
that makes bitcoin
interesting enough that so many smart
people see this as ultrasound money and
what does ultrasound money mean
the world has a history of money
whether it's backed by gold or not
where government
gets themselves excessively into debt
and they devalue the money
so the romans used to clip the edge off
the coins so there was less gold in each
coin
and eventually people would lose faith
in the coins because they blend them
with silver and then blend them with
copper and you know the coins were
worthless because that was supposed to
be worth the value of the of the denarii
in roman times
but governments can't help themselves
humans we're just humans right humans
are fundamentally flawed creatures and
we always will be
so then we have the gold standards you
know the us and the uk run gold
standards world war one world war ii we
all have to leave it because we've got
too much in debt again
we've overly financialized yet again
because humans love leverage above all
things it's kind of sex and leverage are
the two things that drive humans for
some reason
then
we adopt a new system which has been
around before but it keeps getting
abandoned called fiat money fiat money's
money not backed by anything
it's backed by the promise of the
central bank paying it so that's the
dollar bill that we all are familiar
with and every country in the world now
adopted fiat currency
but
as with everything
if you're really thirsty and i gave you
a bottle of water or sold it to you
you probably pay me 10 times too much
for that bottle of water
if i give you a million bottles of water
they're worth precisely zero to you so
scarcity has value that's arts that's
cars that's
almost anything
humans value scarcity for whatever
reason we do
and so
if you're printing too much money
you're creating less scarcity so yes
there's money everywhere
but the money has less value
so once you understand that
you say well
what does it mean the dollar hasn't
collapsed it's kind of where it was
versus the euro in the last five years
or whatever it is
and then you say huh
but my 50 000 salary
now can buy me much less
shares in apple amazon google microsoft
in fact
units of the s p 500 i i suddenly can't
buy as much since 2008 it's a fraction i
can buy like
a third of what i could same with real
estate
same with gold
and then you're like huh
assets have suddenly got expensive
they haven't
the value of your savings has gone down
or your money
so you can't afford to buy assets what
is an asset an asset is deferred
consumption from the future
i buy a house
i sell it in the future i get to retire
whatever the the things are right we
don't buy the s p because we want to
hang it up in our wall we buy it because
we want to sell it at a future date to
realize money
so that means our future sales are now
poorer that's essentially what this
means that's what currency debasement
is so bitcoin comes along in 2008 in the
middle of the crisis it's kind of like
it was perfectly prepared for this and
said
satoshi goes hey look at this
i can create an
algorithm that only creates so much of
this thing the bitcoin
and it can never vary
ever
so therefore this is scarcity that
humans can't [__] around with
now humans have this propensity to [__]
around with scarcity because they're
economically incentivized to do so
here they can't
so then they become economically
incentivized to own this asset
because it's scarce and it cannot be
changed because it has this consistent
supply curve and a limited number
so bitcoin becomes this great store of
value
and it would look like gold because
gold's a good story value it's worked
for thousands of years but bitcoin has
this other thing to it it's a network
which gold isn't and it's technology
which goal isn't so we have use cases
and the benefits of building a network
so suddenly it goes up exponentially in
price
roll on to 2015
and suddenly somebody's looking at the
blockchain
and they start saying
imagine if these bits on the blockchain
which is where you record the ownership
of something in bitcoin it's bitcoin
itself
what happens if we could put a contract
in there
because humans live off contracts you
know everything is basically a contract
in in our legal terms
and that was the rise of ethereum it
became a platform where you could
programmably change the blockchain not
the attributes of the blockchain you
couldn't remove anything off that ledger
but you could change the little holding
buckets and say well it can look like
this could look like that it can adopt
to this
and those things were verifiable as well
so they couldn't change
so this created a theorem which became
the platform so if you think of bitcoin
as the store of value this very pristine
beautiful thing
then you think of ethereum as also a
very beautiful thing but it's a much
broader application
because it's like programmable money
yeah there's one concept that i want to
nail down here and if you think i'm
crazy let me know but
when i think about so i've worked in the
inner cities a lot and
you begin to realize wait a second the
generational poverty is a mindset
knowledge problem far more than it's a
money problem because they manage to
pass on a likelihood of being poor and
so when you think about okay well right
now in the in the us for sure and i
would imagine most of the western world
that your zip code is the number one
predictor of your future success more
than your iq which i'm just not willing
to live in that world but that's a
really fascinating phenomena and when
you begin to ask a question how is that
possible so you have extraordinarily
smart people that regardless of their iq
are going to be trapped in a poverty
cycle why is that
and some of it has to do with what a guy
named jeffrey canada discovered in terms
of the language centers of your brain
and if you're not hearing enough words
when you're an infant just the language
centers don't develop well and you can
have a hard time interviewing for jobs
and climbing the sort of traditional
corporate ladder in that way and then
they just also help you with
communication but the other part is what
is what i call your frame of reference
what do you believe to be true about
yourself and about the world and one of
the ideas that fails to get passed on in
that poverty cycle is an idea of
ownership
and once you understand ownership
now you get into that cycle that you're
talking about where you can you can sell
something in the future because you own
it today and you hopefully buy low and
then sell high and that really is like
just the dead simple equation and i
just to plant a flag that we'll come
back to hold all these ideas in my head
you had mentioned earlier as like a
throwaway that a lot of wealth was
generated in the collapse
and of the economy and so i want people
to understand that this is a game and i
don't mean that in any sort of
derogatory way but it has rules and if
you understand those rules there's
always an opportunity especially in
moments of disruption and we're living
through this incredible technological
disruption right now okay so back to
this idea of ownership so
when i look at bitcoin what i see is
something that i can own right there
will only ever be 21 million of these
now like anything as noah you've all
know a harare says even money is just a
story right it's a fiction that we all
tell and it only has value when we agree
that it has value so bitcoin has that
same sort of
achilles heel that if tomorrow everybody
stop believing that owning that has any
value then it would have no value
but we have this ultra scarce thing that
the last 10 years have proven people
believe has value and you can own a
piece of that and
as we go if it is true that more and
more people will pour into this
digitization of
economic value essentially then that
those 21 million units are going to
become hyper scarce and hyper valuable
now the great news is that you can
fractionalize it so you don't have to
own one you can own some tiny tiny tiny
uh fraction of it but now you you have
ownership so you're able to buy
something now that you can own as it
appreciates in value and then you can
sell it later and so it becomes just
this buy and wait game that real estate
maybe still is but that's why real
estate has worked overtime you owned it
you could also live in it which is
certainly advantageous and then the
expectation was that it would go up in
value
when i think about
ethereum
at first i was like okay i like
how much you know we haven't even talked
we haven't named metcalf's law you've
talked about it but this how you can
value something based on its network
adoption curve
and so i could see there was something
going there and then when i got into
nfts i realized i just had to buy a
bunch of ethereum to use it and so i was
like okay well wait a second if i'm over
here like scrambling just to buy it to
spend it i'm like this is me being able
to buy into the dollar when it's like
new and nobody's sure if we're gonna use
it i thought whoa i would take that
opportunity so that's how i see the
difference in the two one is just sort
of straight ownership of something and
then one is like well i know people use
this and because people use it and
there's controls around the supply that
the odds are that it will go up in value
ethereum's kind of like owning a part of
the internet
it's
as you said i mean
everybody has to use ethereum basically
that uses this crypto rails unless
you're just in the bitcoin world
but everything that we've talked about
and everybody will have even if you're
not very familiar with the space we'll
have heard the term defy or nfts or
tokens
basically most of that is still being
built on ethereum
and as you said the network so what is
this metcalfe's law that you and i have
referred to
metcalfe's law is
it really started to become understood
in the 80s and then much more so as
mobile phone network started these giant
connected networks right because digital
technology allowed networks to connect
before it's humans we couldn't connect
with each other in the same way
so
networks connect with mobile phones
suddenly they explode in value you know
all these phone companies huge companies
and if you added them all up around the
world they'd be worth tens of trillions
probably we just don't even think of it
in those terms because they're
fragmented networks
then the internet comes along this free
network and everybody builds on top of
it and they create network effects like
the most classic example is facebook
facebook connects us with friends and
family
and
in exchange
they get your data they sell you adverts
and they
so you've got a bunch of people using it
a bunch of businesses now building on it
and this advertising monetization
structure shareholders get rich the uh
you know you and i get to
unfortunately meet somebody from
university that we don't want to talk to
that we met 20 years ago and we're now
connected with again you know it's that
but the network that ethereum and
bitcoin does is different you're the
owner of the network and the user
so as a user like you said with the nft
you're actually owning a share of the
network itself
so everybody uses it owns a part of it
therefore if the network's going to get
used a lot
you're all going to get rich and the
value of the network's going to go up
massively
and the more people built
interconnection so
metcalfe's law is not only just the
number of nodes either number of users
but how much they connect with each
other well you're seeing it because
there's nfts and there's d5 and there's
all of these applications or the store
of money aspect
these things all together and then
there's the linking of all of these like
chain link or you know some of these
other protocols um polkadot they're
linking all this ecosystems together so
i can send you a dollar instantaneously
and we have no idea whether it went on
bitcoin rails xrp rails ethereum rails
and guess what we don't care
i promised you a dollar you want to get
the dollar instantaneously that's
interoperability that's all coming
so this is what ethereum is about it's
the magnitude of this network
where everybody's developing everything
on top of it
and it's scarce supply so it's seeing an
even faster adoption rate than bitcoin
now
and for for the reasons that seem pretty
clear because it has more use cases than
currently the bitcoin blockchain does
doesn't mean bitcoin blockchain can't in
due course
but right now there's a lot more use
cases in ethereum it's super exciting
do you think that bitcoin would need to
do something like that in order to
retain its value proposition
no i think its value proposition stands
above all things
it is pristine it's pure it is what it
is um and you know the way it's so
impossible to change any of the
attributes of bitcoin makes it a bit
clunky
and that clunkiness is its beauty
it is so secure it's the most secure of
all protocols so let it be what it wants
to be now people are building things
like the lightning layer which allows
you to do lots of fast payments over the
top maybe that scales maybe it doesn't
doesn't really matter that store of
value for every person to think of
like it's owning a piece of manhattan
real estate
at low prices
that's never going away
not in the conceivable future because
humans have now said it has value and
it's being adopted very fast
so
no ethereum's a very different thing it
doesn't compete
that's how i like to think about it and
unfortunately when you go online people
will tell you well it's competing and
it's not as good
you have to ignore all of that and look
at the whole space overall and say and
just be honest saying we don't know
where this is going to be in 10 years
time
and like you say so therefore i can own
three of these things and probability is
i'm going to capture a large part of
this and maybe i'll adapt in due course
and so yeah one thing
sorry go ahead yeah so it's it's don't
over force the narrative just be broad
be open
and always be learning as you've rightly
said because we don't know this is all
new and it's happening at lightning
speed
yeah that's the thing that i i am
certainly most attracted to with you and
the way that you are and seems to be
something that people echo a lot about
you is you're very open-minded
is your open-mindedness the reason you
have been successful or is it a response
to the struggles of getting to where
you've gotten in your life
i you know it's i think it's part of it
is my background
you know my father's a first generation
immigrant from india my mother's a first
generation immigrant from
holland they met on a blind date in
birmingham in the uk i've lived in india
i've lived in spain i've grew up in the
uk i've lived in
the cayman islands i've traveled the
world
so it forces you to be open because
you've got different religious
backgrounds there you've got different
massively different cultural backgrounds
all of this stuff forces you to be
open-minded so i'm generally open-minded
by nature just because of that
and macro
investing
is all about being open-minded to other
possibilities
so once you learn the trick that it's
okay to say you don't know but i think
this might be how it plays out so you
think in what's known as probabilistic
terms
then for that to happen for you to say
look i think there's a you know there's
a 80 chance that bitcoin over the next
five years is going to 250 000
that's a reasonable odds
what's the 20 chance that it doesn't
okay so you need to open have both of
those things in your mind at any one
stage and be assessing them
i learned that from the book
uh
i think it was
the alchemy of finance by george soros
who was probably the most famous of all
the macro investors
and he would talk about this a lot that
you have to have these kind of logic
trees of think your probability trees
and once you understand that you can
even bet against yourself
which is really hard to do and i can't
do it but some of the best traders can
be you know long the s p they think the
s p is rising but then they think the
odds of it falling are getting higher
and they start selling against
themselves it's like it's it's very hard
to do
but that kind of investing teaches you
to keep an open mind because you're
looking at the whole world
and you have to know that we don't know
the outcome
anybody who tells you
that they know what's going to happen
it's just a fraud
it's just the open mind said i don't
know but i think and this is why i think
that's all you need to do that's
open-minded in a nutshell admitting that
you are fallible
yeah i think that that is
extraordinarily smart um one thing that
i've noticed about entrepreneurs is the
most successful are the ones that are
able to hold competing ideas in their
head at the same time
and
you so when i'm teaching
entrepreneurship one thing that i talk
about is okay you have to have this
narrative so you have a goal you're
trying to get there you know where you
are there's a chasm between where you
are and your goal your goal is probably
uh you know skate to where the puck is
going to be so it's something where
you're making a bet about how either
culture is moving or technology is
moving
and then you have to
create a narrative that says this is how
i'm going to go from where i'm at to
there and what that narrative does is it
it smooths out some of those like leaps
of faith that you're going to have to
make in order to get where you want to
go but then you know bringing this back
to somebody in the finance world that
i've learned a lot from ray dalio
where he had that just catastrophic
learning event where he realized you
know we had all this conviction about
something that was happening in the
market and he ended up being wrong and
it just obliterated his company and
he realized okay
you can believe you're right
but you have to hold open in your mind
how do i know i'm right and constantly
be looking for disconfirming evidence so
it's like i tell people you have to have
all this conviction you have to be able
to lead with conviction you have to be
able to go into something believing this
is going to work my narrative is true
that's how i'm going to cross this chasm
to get to my goal but [__] you
better have opened in your head this
idea of i have to challenge this
narrative i have to constantly look for
the the ideas and reasons why i'm wrong
and if you can't do both race forward
with conviction and constantly battle
test that idea you are in trouble and
that's why being an entrepreneur is so
damned hard
that narrative of entrepreneurship is
start thing in garage borrow money off
parents or start on your credit card
three years later billy there
right that's the narrative and then you
write your book on on how i manage my
company right that's actually not true
the best book ever written on this is
ben horowitz is the hard thing about
hard things
what you have to do is battle
both your assumption as you say
and test it endlessly you have to be
paranoid excessively paranoid but still
confident
in that you're right
and you also have to accept the risk of
failure because the moment you accept
the risk of failure which is very high
in startups
you'll start hedging against it once you
stop
worrying about failure as the narrative
you tend to attract it
it's a really difficult thing people who
fear failure above all things tend to
fail more
people who don't look at failure and
just look at the moonshot tend to fail
too
it's the people who can see
failure as a wolf behind them
and the testing of the ideas but still
having conviction and maybe changing
paths because the wolf is catching up
they tend to fail less but it's hard
makes you feel sick you don't sleep at
night
and that's the beginning of ben
horowitz's book
basically is two pages of what that
feels like it's called the struggle
and that the struggle is
probably the most profound two pages in
all of entrepreneurship and it's true
and it's hard
that's a great book
um so going back to investing i want to
lay out for people that might be new to
this they're not seasoned investors
the idea of dollar cost averaging was
extraordinarily comforting to me um and
i'd love to go into what it is why it's
useful and whether you think that
applies to what's happening in crypto so
there's a mythology of investing the
mythology is investing is hedge fund
manager george soros
spots the opportunity gets in at the
right price makes a fortune
the reality is
most people have no idea where the price
is going over a short term
so what happens is you buy something you
put all your money in you've saved up
your 5 000 bucks you put it all into
bitcoin bitcoin falls 50 you panic you
sell it
you feel terrible bitcoin goes back up
again you felt feel even worse now you
can scrape together you know you've
you've lost you know half of your money
now and then you've you you
you keep compounding these errors right
it's called market timing and market
timing is extraordinarily difficult you
know i i do some market timing
because that's been my job and 30 years
i've done more than my 10 000 hours a
lot more than my 10 000 and that doesn't
make me very good at it either i'm not
bad at it in long term investing i'm
terrible at short term
so what is dollar cost averaging all the
cost averaging is basically what
everybody does with their 401k the
problem is with 401ks or retirement
funds is nobody cares about them
you don't know what's in it you have to
have no ownership you just put some of
your salary away and it goes in this
mythical thing that you probably assume
won't be worth as much money as you hope
it is
that's what that's become
and you put it in every month
why do you do that well because you're
averaging all of the highs and lows over
time because markets tend to do this
so you're kind of indifferent in fact
you love it when it falls because you're
buying more units
at a lower price because your game is to
own as much as you can
at the lowest possible price
but if you don't know how to market time
and 99.9
of people don't and cards and shouldn't
then you just average in overtime and
magic will happen you just average a
beautiful price over time and had you
done that in the s p or anything else
you make money now what's so lovely
about bitcoin is
it's not a passive investment like your
your retirement fund
because a retirement fund you can't
access until later so you kind of write
it off and you you know everybody's
heard that it's never going to be worth
as much as it should be anyway so it's
become a bit of a pain as opposed to
something but this you own
you live and breathe that volatility and
you live and breathe those gains when
they happen
and you will be like wide-eyed
i did it's my sister-in-law forced her
to do this i said listen i'm gonna make
it easy keep just gonna open a paypal
account start that way
and she had some savings
um she could take out of another thing
she had like five thousand bucks ten
thousand bucks
and she put it in and we got the timing
relatively right so it shot up a lot i
think she got in about 13 000 in bitcoin
yeah and it shot up a lot so she's like
wow and then it falls a lot and she's
calling me up saying what do i do should
i sell some i'm like no
you keep putting in part of your
paycheck
and
after all of these falls there's several
falls she starts to really understand
and when they start falling a lot she
starts doubling the amount that she
would have normally invested
and now she's taught herself to invest
next thing i hear are well i bought some
ethereum
and this is how i'm dealing with that
so she's now
looking at two different things and
she's now thinking about the asset
allocation what's going to outperform
ethereum
she knew nothing about this stuff this
is a year and a half and she now
understands because of that dollar cost
averaging and taking ownership that you
exactly as you said once you actually
own something that 401k you don't
actually really own it's like some other
guy does something with it and hopefully
he makes money this is you
you're taking responsibility for your
own finances that's so empowering
one thing that i think is really
important that i haven't heard people
talking about and just because my mind
is so simplistic when it comes to
investing
is i look at the stock market and i've
got a money manager and like all that
and she's trying to explain to me puts
and calls and all this i'm like god is
so [__] confusing i don't want to
think about this i want to go run my
business and so i yeah i just never
wanted to get on the phone and talk
about it was just too complicated part
of the glory of what's happening right
now in bitcoin is
if you stay or crypto if you stay sort
of at the top of the ones that have the
most sort of crowd validation because
you can get into the deep weeds on
what's going on in altcoins but if you
just stay at the top which has massive
crowd validation and you go okay
i'm gonna buy a bit of bitcoin i'm gonna
buy a bit of ethereum and then you learn
like your sister did about the
volatility and like how to ride that
wave and to recognize and and for
anybody listening if you're new to this
idea
have a thesis
you dollar cost average based on your
thesis so here is tom's overly
simplistic thesis
that i believe that
technology is a one-way street that very
few people are in cryptocurrency right
now
i believe that over time it will take
over
some massive percentage of
the financial system so let's say that
it goes to
i don't know become a 10 trillion dollar
asset so i can buy that i don't it
doesn't take an extraordinary leap of
faith it's at just below i think 1
trillion as of the time that we're
recording this so i'm like whoa 10x my
money like that would be incredible okay
well as long as i believe in that thesis
i want the price to drop so when the
price drops i'm not panicking i'm like
yeah buddy because like you said now the
amount has gone down so when i first got
into this it was the height of the
euphoria like
bitcoin was just going to the moon it
was just insane and so i was like oh my
god i have to buy into this and so i
bought in i start dollar cost averaging
and the price is going up up up up and
i'm still dollar cost averaging and i'm
like oh man should i be going faster
like the price is going high and i'm
like no no
dollar cost average you never know
what's going to happen
and then boom whatever happened uh you
know i guess it was like a month ago six
weeks ago something like that it just
[__] went down like 30 40 percent
and
i was like oh thank god i still have one
my thesis is still intact two the amount
of money i was willing to invest i
haven't hit yet so now at this much
lower price so what i am training myself
to be obsessed over is the the
break-even point so if my original
breakeven point was let's say 52 000 for
bitcoin as i came down and i kept buying
in and buying in and buying in now my
break-even point goes from 52 000 i got
it down to like 30 something
and so i'm like this is incredible so
now that we're riding that wave back up
and i'm telling my wife like we're up
this much in 48 hours we're up this much
in a week we're up this much in 10 days
she's like what like it's it's almost
impossible to believe and i'm very
careful to check that like the hey the
euphoria is dangerous you have to be
careful you have to constantly like the
wolf is right behind you like you really
do have to be thoughtful but dollar cost
averaging based on a thesis
that's the way to go there's another
thing i think it needs to be said is
you're now faced with something that
really offers people enormous
opportunity you took a ten for one i
think the space over the whole space
over
the next 10
10 12 years is probably 100x right
that's a whole asset class we've never
seen that in history in that space of
time
but humans are humans we go back to that
fundamental flaw
is we love leverage
tell people what leverage is for the the
beverages when you borrow money to buy
something
so let's say you had borrowed to buy the
original bitcoin purchases
and let's say you put down half of the
money
so
basically at 27 000 or 26 000
you've lost all your money
now bitcoin hit that
you'd have been wiped out
and you'd have had to pay somebody and
you'll have been liquidated
and then bitcoin goes back up in price
and you'll have missed it all
that's what leverage does because
it's okay in a house because house
prices aren't very volatile so
occasionally once in a generation you
get a 2008 thing
where the house prices start moving a
lot and suddenly the people's equity in
their house wasn't enough and everybody
gets liquidated i.e the bank says we
want our money back
that's okay to take that risk if you're
cautious in housing in crypto this thing
moves around like this
its predictability in the short term is
extremely low unlike housing
predictability
so just don't borrow money to do this
that's the if i can get that across
then you don't care if it falls to 26
000 or 10 000 because you can buy more
units at the lower price over time and
you don't care and then when it's
trading at
500 000 you'll have become extremely
wealthy it's as simple as that
don't over complicate it don't think
about derivatives futures options
none of it just do stick with this
simple plan don't use leverage dollar
cost average think about as a five to
ten year investment and your probability
of success
is going to be extremely high
it's funny how
when it's dropping there is
you begin to question everything you
thought you knew in the euphoria
and i've never lived through this so for
me i was fresh out of college when the
internet was really booming and i was
not focused on business i wanted to be a
filmmaker that was it i was just
entirely focused on that
and
so the sense of like when people talk
about euphoria in the market i didn't
really understand what that meant but
like now especially with social media
when bitcoin is going to the moon like
you can just go on twitter and everybody
is so happy and it's like it just feels
there's so much energy and so much
excitement and so much conviction and
then boom it'll flip on a dime and
people start panicking and i remember so
one i don't buy on leverage just
remember humans are ridiculous that's
all you have to remember
they're hilarious hilarious and by the
way i'm in the middle of it like i don't
think i'm above this by any way
and when the price turned and so i was
like i called my family i'm like guys
you must get into crypto and they were
all sort of paralyzed by indecision so i
said look my wife and i are going to
help you open the account and then we
will give you money
the only catch is you must spend it on
crypto and so we did all of that and
then
watching everybody's like emotion flip
when the price started dropping and for
a minute i was like
wait do i have like enough conviction in
this and i was like okay technology is a
one-way street i believe that this is
going to digitize as an asset class i
will watch and pay attention if
something new comes along but for right
now yes it all holds and so i was like
okay and so i just kept investing and
then as i like i said i i started
focusing on that that break even number
pulling down my um cost of interest
there's a name what's the name of that
like your
the point at which your average buy-in
cost of entry perfect so watching that
come down became like my obsession and
then so i start getting that low and i'm
really excited and i keep buying in and
then it flips again and it starts going
back up and so now i'm like okay i've
ridden a wave i know what it feels like
when it drops i know how you still have
to like
check your thesis 100 dollar cost
average 100
but now because i did that now i'm
getting the gains as it swings back up
and i'm still in a range that's what's
crazy there's so much money to be made
even just
by taking advantage of that like
momentary volatility now i'm not i am a
a macro guy in the making i think only
long term i'm not going to sell as i
keep telling my wife as fun as it is to
watch it go up everything is noise sub
five years so like just don't even think
about it
it's quite funny because
i'm you know i've become pretty public
in all of this space
and
i've got a very clear idea of what where
i think it's going and how it's going to
go so i have my thesis
and when everything starts falling apart
like the market starts moving
hey i look like how's it moved in the
past and it's done similar things right
and i've been telling everybody who's
ever got into the space
you need to expect a 50 correction in a
bull market
and you might see a 70
bear market
and over five years you'll have still
made more money than you could imagine
so you have to accept those things
so this thing starts tanking bitcoin
starts first then then ethereum rolls
over later and it also and it's all down
and
i said
i've got this weight on my shoulders
i've got all of these people have been
following me i have been telling them
this but you know messes with your mind
and i pick out the one chart that
matters to me
which is the adoption chart
is anything that's going on with china
and mining and this and that
changing the adoption curve or not
no
so then as you said the relentless rise
of technology continues so la la la i
can't hear it
so i turn around to my wife and i'm like
you know
you know it's fallen fifty percent
everybody's freaking out and she just
looks and goes you are all so ridiculous
she said you said you should expect this
now it's happening everybody's freaking
out and she just walked off and said
debbie's she just said don't stupid and
walked out of the room
and i'm like yeah
just you know twitter is somewhere
sometimes or reddit or whatever whatever
forum you're on is sometimes your enemy
and sometimes you just need to turn that
off
now it's been the same with
investing in amazon
right the reason
bezos is so wealthy
because he was probably one of the only
people in the world
who had amazon shares from the beginning
and never sold them
because it went down 95
oh
in 2001 2.
it's had
several 60
falls
and it still made him the richest man in
the world
this is what exponentiality looks like
and for people who are a little more
savvy
there's a magic trick to everything to
keep your sanity in this because this
stuff goes like this and it does this
and
is you'll see this like free free
charting almost on every platform now
trading view something like that
just change the scale to a log scale
logarithmic scale and what you'll find
is like you look at facebook it goes
like this you look at
amazon goes like this right and it
always feels like i can't buy this this
gone up too much you know that that that
fear that you had at 52 000 right but
that's real
you change it to a log chart and it's a
beautiful
trend
and you realize it's all noise
and yes those movements can be 50 60
but it's just moving in that lovely
little trend facebook has done that
since 2012 never deviated nor has apple
nor has microsoft nor has google
none of these have
not even tesla and nor has bitcoin and
nor is ethereum they're all network
effects and they're priced in the same
way
they're all exponential in nature which
we can't get our heads around until you
put it on a log chart and it makes you
calm down
what what does the log chart do i've
heard the phrase but i i honestly don't
know what that means the scale so
normally a scale would go like a bitcoin
chart but because it starts really low
it might start at 10
and then it's got to go up to
65 000
so suddenly you're seeing a move a
thousand dollar move
um it looks small but before it was big
so what happens is it squashes the
charts
because most of the price action has
happened from let's say ten thousand
dollars to sixty five 000. so you keep
getting this looks like this all the
time
and so this is just by stretching out
the timeline no so what a log chart does
is change the scale where it doubles
every measure so it goes 10
or it goes 10x let's say 10 100
a thousand dollars a million dollars
what that little trick does
is smooth out all of this issue
so
you'll get comfortable when you look at
it just to realize that and look at the
scale look how it's changed versus the
other scale and you'll see from that
it basically compresses all of this it's
the same as if you do use percentages
because you know a five thousand point
move now in bitcoin is not the same as a
five thousand point move when it was at
five thousand it would have been a
hundred percent
and now it's not now it's like whatever
it is today ten percent
so it's it's it's changing that
um and that that really really really
helps
it's interesting so you're getting into
the psychology of all this which i find
utterly fascinating of
it doesn't matter what you look at it
matters what you see so you're looking
at this chart you have to be very
careful because if you they most of the
charts at least i use uh coinbase pro so
it defaults to like a really short time
period and so it's just like oh my god
like this is all over the place why do
they do that because it makes you trade
more
yes
yes yes
no doubt you're like oh my god i need to
sell i need to buy what do i need and
then you zoom out and put the the
five-year chart or 10-year chart i said
oh this is
noise
that's exactly what it feels like and
i've heard people talk about that i
think it's very sage advice when you're
feeling stressed zoom out like literally
zoom out the timeline so that as you
broaden out and it's like okay okay okay
this all gets very smooth and easy to
handle
now
the
best way to look at somebody's
conviction around their thesis is to see
what their percentage allocation of
their net worth they have in said thesis
so when i started in crypto i was like
okay one percent i'll i'll get to one
percent i just don't want to be a fool
it's sort of schmuck insurance then as i
got to one percent i was like well this
feels pretty good i'm gonna go to two
percent
and then that's where i was about when
it started to fall and so i was like
okay well here's my opportunity to buy
in thesis is still intact why don't we
go to five percent and so now i'm like
well five percent feels pretty good i'm
thinking about 10 percent so
what is your allocation of course i know
this punch line but it'll be interesting
for people that don't know
so i am
this is going to sound weird when i tell
you i'm actually risk averse
so i own
a few properties
myself and i live in them so i don't
rent anything out you know these are
this is my bank is lifestyle
so and i and i like to live in nice
places
so
that i don't consider consider money
that i'm investing or doing anything
with that's just buried in lifestyle
my shares in real vision
as an entrepreneur they could be worth
nothing they could be worth gazillion
that's not part of it so what really
matters is your
liquid net worth
the money that you've got available to
invest
and i'm
100 in crypto
and i feel like i'm underexposed
so maybe i didn't start with enough cash
um that i should you know i should have
had more in cash you know
um as opposed to in real estate or
whatever
but
it's a hundred percent i feel massively
underexposed now why can i do a hundred
percent because i have income i have
numerous sources of income
so i've always got money coming in
if i lost
well you're never going to lose 100
because i've got no leverage so it could
go down
and it'd be back to roughly where i
bought it so i'm kind of
safe in this crypto space now i can't
really lose money
but i've got cash flow coming in
so even if i did lose it it's not gonna
change my life
and in fact cash flow coming in gives me
an ability
to buy at lower prices
so i'm structurally set up to take
take advantage of the biggest
opportunity i've ever seen
and i'm comfortable with that now i
don't know what percentage of my total
net worth it is because i don't think of
total net worth as total net worth
because those are things that are never
going to change you know my my my beach
house a little cayman do i sell it and
buy something else i'm gonna invest in
something else with it that is the
answers lifestyle is the answer to
everything right we don't do anything
else for any other reason i don't think
or you shouldn't
to be rich is not
is not a future state
to have the lifestyle that you want is
the future state and that can be
anything you can live on a shack and a
beach nicaragua and be the happiest man
in the world go for that
so that's what i care about but liquid
net worth yeah everything and i feel
under-invested and desperate to you know
waiting for the next quarter when more
income comes in to put more in because i
feel underinvested at all times that's
how that's how much conviction i have
i've and i've never done that before
ever in my entire lifetime have i ever
taken a bet like this
i want people i want to make sure that
they hear though that you've got the
income coming in that this is not a
leveraged trade i think that that's very
very smart
i don't have debt this is
my pool of investable savings it's my
entire life
savings because i don't count the house
and all the houses and stuff
so i can't be forced out of it
i can't lose everything
and i've got an income that tops it up
so i can buy more or if i get the bet
wrong and it doesn't go anywhere for
five years i can get i can buy other
stuff i can cover my cost of living
everything is fine
so yes it sounds and i call it
irresponsibly long
but it's actually not very responsive
it's actually quite responsible it's
just a very high conviction bet
yeah this is such a fascinating time and
i'm very aware and it sounds like you
are as well i'm very aware of okay i'm a
by internet standards i'm a somewhat
public figure there are people that
listen
and i
i feel this obligation to
tell people
you you just have to be aware of what's
going on i don't trust my understanding
of investment strategies enough to tell
people hey go do exactly this
but i like when i really think about the
things that would mess with my head
it would mess with my head if
cryptocurrency ends up being what i
think it's going to be and i didn't tell
people to at least research it because
what so
my wife and i end up getting just
fantastically wealthy and you have this
moment where i know you've dealt with
this where it's like do i buy an island
and retire and just you know check out
and sit my ties on the beach all day
or do i recognize that what really
matters is meaning and purpose and so i
want to do i want lifestyle i'm with you
on that but at the same time i want to
matter and i want to help other people
and so then you come into the game and
you go okay who am i going to help and
because of our background we had about a
thousand employees that grew up in the
inner cities and you just see what a
devastating force it is you come to the
realization i talked about earlier which
this is a mindset problem and so we
start thinking about okay how are we
going to address this you get in you
realize people's monies towards people's
attitudes towards money and that becomes
one of like the key areas where i want
to help people so originally it was all
about giving people an entrepreneurial
mindset so they could control their life
and i really believe in that and i think
that when you think which to me is just
taking ownership of your life and
recognizing when you have a company the
buck stops with me i have to figure this
out there's no way
to hide because i'm either going to be
able to pay my employees or i'm not like
there's there's just no [__] in that
and so you realize okay the market's
always going to win i have to figure out
how to run this company well so that i
can pay everybody so super powerful
mindset
now crypto comes along and i'm like oh
my god this really is this it is a
moment where all the people who are
angry frustrated disenfranchised this is
your [__] shot and i heard you say
this this is so powerful thinking about
the words you said or giving me the
chills where you said this is the first
time where the
retail investors so the average everyday
person gets to front run meaning go
before
the big institutions it's always been
the other way around the big
institutions take the like cream off the
top for themselves and then all of us
get the leftovers and this is the first
time where it's flipped so if you think
about rolling hood or any of these big
ipos that have just happened what
they're basically doing is there's a
bunch of vcs who've made a thousand x
100x whatever the number is
and they've got obscenely rich investing
in something that you're not allowed to
invest in because of the law
because you're not an accredited
investor
and in fact the system's so set up that
you're never
ever going to be shown this opportunity
and then at the very end when the assets
gone up so much
they then
list it on the new york stock exchange
or the nasdaq and dump it on retail
when the best gains have been had now
within that there's always going to be
an amazon and a microsoft and an apple
but your chances are getting in at the
higher price so you're the 52 000 guy
and not the
averaging at 30 000
your probability of success is always
lower than those guys
so the system is against you
in this
the institutions are being held back by
regulation and can't do it
but we're not
and we know that they have a lot of
money because it's actually our pensions
and so we they're going to put our
pensions in this in the end well we
might as well make money from them
coming into the market later
and driving up prices ridiculously
because that is what's going to happen
once this etf is listed every raa in
america is going to be advising
their clients to buy the bitcoin etf and
the ethereal etf and it'll drive another
half a trillion dollars of price
appreciation you know
this is all coming
um and it is the opportunity and i've
tried to set everybody up like you
i've had that sense of responsibility
real vision was about that
but it's also a subscription model so i
purposely give ridiculous amounts of
information out on twitter
that's free
subscription models because i need to
pay my staff and create a proper
business that has value
but i give a much out and free we give
tons of stuff out on youtube and tons of
stuff out in the podcast and then with
crypto i just thought [__] it we're
going to give the whole thing away free
so kind of real vision crypto
is a free channel we just said we're
going to get sponsors from these big
players because they're making tons of
money the exchanges and others they can
pay for everybody else to get access so
i can pay the staff for the crypto stuff
because it's that important to me it's
like guys i'm giving you everything you
need we do five interviews a week with
everybody in the space and they're so
good so there's no excuse not to educate
yourself it's all there at first you go
in there and go oh i don't know what
this is all about that's okay
you'll find the thing that interests you
and you'll find your way in and then
you'll go down the rabbit hole but yeah
i passionately believe you know that
that the future of everything is based
around community you have a community in
what you do i have a community around
what i do
and part of community is the inherent
or the the the inherent agreement
that you're all in this together
i'm not going to be extractive of you
and you're not going to be extracted
from me but together we can all benefit
from being part of this community
crypto is a community in its own right
and we're all benefiting for being part
of that we're all part of that community
but i think
that
that's why both you and i are very
passionately
passionate believers
in bringing everybody along for the ride
because
everybody around us has enabled us to to
build this amazing network and all of
these things so they should everybody
should share and this is something that
you'll pick up from my interviews i've
been talking about a lot all of this is
going to get tokenized too culture is
going to become an investment the
probability of there being a tom coin
within five years is something like 100
yeah so i definitely want to talk about
that because i think you've got some
really fascinating ideas there
before we move on i haven't talked about
this publicly but this idea of a
credited investor so
i don't understand why people aren't
rioting in the streets
it is the most obscene and it's
masquerading and so i'll explain what it
is people you tell me because you
understand this a lot better than i do
tell me if i go straight anywhere so the
government is basically saying
hey
you're not
savvy enough to
invest your money wisely you're going to
get taken advantage of so we're going to
protect you just by making it impossible
for you to do
these early stage investments
unless your net worth is a million
dollars or more it's something sort of
that basic
and i remember when i crossed that and
suddenly my net worth was over that and
i was like but wait i'm not any savvier
when it comes to investing i know how to
build businesses and most of it might
have been your house so it's not like
you've got more money
it just so happens your house has gone
up because you bought it in a nice
neighborhood
it's ridiculous
ridiculous and so i'm like
how how are people not complaining about
this like that's the one thing that i
sort of look around and go wait like
this is
madness
and you're allowed to bet
so you can go to vegas lose all of your
money and there's no regulation
but if you want to invest in a group of
startups or a single startup it's deemed
too risky by somebody
and a lot of that is a power grab by
wall street because what does that mean
it means you can't do it you have to
give it to somebody else
and they can pull the money so then
you're not taking specific risks
and what that means is somebody on wall
street gets rich at your
on your behalf
because you're now paying them fees that
you didn't have to pay that's the beauty
of bitcoin you're basically a vc
investor in the future of money
not bitcoin ethereum even even better
you've got you're a vc investor in the
future platform of the internet of value
and you're paying nobody any fees
dude let that sink in
like that's yeah it's really really
crazy and
man i just really hope
good there's no bank saying well you
have to do it through us if you want to
do this
you can buy it and store it on a
hard wallet
and there's nobody involved that is the
power of what is happening here
this is too
this is true kind of distributed power
within
wealth creation that people only dream
of
this is the system not
being against you but working for you
for once
yep this is this is the the chance it's
uh it's really exciting and the more you
learn about it the more you just start
freaking out like whoa this is really
custom designed of course it was i
haven't read the satoshi white paper
which
probably would benefit me i think it'd
be make it easier to communicate to
people but it is
it's kind of like that ultra secure bank
you were talking about starting it's
like somebody who really sat down and
thought how do we put the power back in
people's hands and make sure that it's
uncorruptable uh it's it's really pretty
phenomenal all right getting into like
this idea of tokenization first if you
don't mind explain to people what
tokenization is and then we'll get into
like where this is all headed their
heads are going to be melting by now
yeah but this is how it starts and in
fact once sort of a quick primer if
they've made it this far they probably
don't need it but uh here's how learning
works you start not even [__] knowing
the terms and so you take the first step
down the rabble hole you're like this is
madness i don't even understand the
words people are saying you start to get
the vocabulary certain words will jump
out at you go look those up now you
begin to cobble like i kind of know
what's going on then you can like you
said you pick that path that you
understand you go through so that sense
of like overwhelming confusion a it's
perfectly natural and b in the beginning
just find the words once you understand
the words that'll be the key to
unlocking things okay so with that one
of the words that we need to define is
tokenization what does that mean so
remember we talked about smart contracts
smart contracts are this thing that you
can attach to the blockchain and that
contract can be any kind of contract
so
that brings up the word tokenization
because
you can therefore attach anything onto
the blockchain because of this contract
piece of art
fractionalized real estate whatever
whatever
so
bitcoin okay that's attached on the
blockchain but now it can be other
things because the contract will say
well legally it has the rights of this
so it starts off with people
conceptualizing about real estate
artwork other things why real estate
this is a really powerful thing real
estate none of us can afford the 50
million apartment in manhattan
but that goes up 100 in two years unlike
something in queens that goes up
20 in five years
so the rich dudes getting richer while
the poor are getting less well off the
rich poor divide
once you fractionalize it like you can
with bitcoin
that anybody can own 10 of their net
worth in a 50 million apartment we're
all making the same amount of returns
the rich don't get richer we all get the
same
if it goes down in price we all go down
in price
that is what it should be that is what
tokenizing real estate is going to do
and you can do it with tokenizing
artwork so you're allowing
fractionalized ownership of all sorts of
things that is recorded nobody can take
it away from you it's written
and recorded on the blockchain
and on that ledger it's confirmed by
lots of people to say
tom owns this piece of this real estate
and nobody else can take it okay that's
genius
but then what happened was this massive
explosion this year in digital art
or just happened last year digital art
was where you start
tokenizing
the recorded ownership of something
digital so people say digital art well
it's just a jpeg
well a jpeg has no scarcity
now it's the same with photographic art
so photographic art has no real scarcity
until it's signed
or you have the negative
then it's priceless
that creates scarcity
and i i collect sign rock and roll
photographs
um a music artist signed by famous
photographers now
because it has scarcity and i like that
um so
that applies with digital art too
because if you say there's only gonna be
one of this and it's recorded on a
blockchain and it's called a
non-fungible token it's a token
then i can sell it to you and you now
have the rights to it we have scarcity
there's one
and this guy called beeple
creates
i don't know i can't remember how many
pieces of art it's like 14 000 pieces of
art
those more so he did 15 000 pieces of
art which was all into one
jpeg
which was 13 years worth of daily art
and all incredible
and then he sells it at christie's or
sotheby's for 69 million dollars
and everyone goes oh my god it's the
same when damian when um banksy started
selling graffiti and everyone's like
this is ridiculous
and now suddenly everybody wants a
banksy and it's the same when
um
jackson pollock started spraying paint
and now everybody wants to jackson park
nobody believes in art until they do and
it's that same human system you talked
about once we perceive it's got value
it's got value that's how it's going to
be and we will trade it for whatever it
is
so we can put
digital art
we can tokenize it and own it
but that also means we can tokenize
things like ip rights
so this video we could tokenize and only
token holders can watch it
or there's advertising that comes
attached to it or whatever it is and
anybody who owns part of the token or
one of those tokens
can get some of those rights
so that means that music artists who are
getting screwed by everybody they lose
80 percent of their economics
by the ticket sellers the middlemen the
um music publishers the record labels
the talent management business i mean
everybody including google facebook
everybody's taking money they're
bringing massive communities
handing them over for free and getting
back 20 of the economics it's terrible
but imagine now you can tokenize the ip
to a song
so every time it's ever used it directly
attributes to you so let's go back to
that people um example he cleverly put
into that contract
that every time you change hands
he gets paid a commission 20
that never happened to us
so
damien hirst every time he sells stuff
he gets the money at the beginning the
gallery takes 50
and then every time it trades he never
makes a penny again
but this people will make money forever
and so will his family every time that
ever trades
so it's like van gogh
his family always having
a share of that
so
super interesting ip writes to songs
ip writes to all sorts of things video
in a digital age it could be anything
and then you think about okay well what
is where's this all going
well it's going to community
because community is the new powerful
business model where
a group of like-minded people
coalesce around an idea a person a set
of ideas so if you go back you talked
about hirari's book the other great book
is jared diamond's um john's guns germs
and steel very similar kind of book
in that book he says he talks about
complex
adaptive societies human groups large
human groups
how do you
how do you hold those people together
how you do that
is basically you have a leader
you have a mission you have a set of
rules
and then you usually have a value or a
money
and that's trivial religions it's true
of almost all groups
but what was missing in most religions
had the value part because it's like if
you didn't follow the rules and follow
the leader you went to heaven or hell or
you didn't get reincarnated whatever
religion you're part of
in modern societies like us
you have a leader you have kind of a
mission you have a set of rules
and then you have
money
and money is what binds them together
that is your national accounting for
your society
but tokenization
means we can all have a system of money
right bitcoin is the system of money for
the people on the bitcoin network
but
i can have a system of money based
around real vision
because we have
hundreds of thousands of users
who all want to gain value from the
ecosystem and want to create value
within the ecosystem but more
obviously it's with musicians and sports
stars
you know if you're rihanna
you have
you're the third largest social media
influence in the world after
barack obama and
i can't remember who the other who the
next one was
so it's her and bieber
she has
150 million followers
whoa
that's just on twitter
so her reach is something like 400
million people
on a daily basis
they all want to be part of the
community of rihanna we saw that with
lady gaga and her little monsters
if you give them a leader
a mission
a set of rules
and then a system of money you've
created an economy a country a digital
country
and that has value if you make your
society successful
it goes up in value and you create more
gdp
so this is now us getting rich from
culture
we coalesce around this idea
we create the system of money in this
rules
and then we look after our society if we
look after it our network grows we bring
more people into the rihanna network the
value of our tokens go up rihanna gets
wealthier
and the fans get wealthier
that is a whole change in the old world
it would have been rihanna gets super
rich
all of these other people around her get
even richer
and the fans don't get anything except
some experience
that's the old facebook i did the
shareholders got rich but the people who
use facebook got nothing except abused
really
this tokenization changes everything we
can all participate
i don't think people understand
how much has already been disrupted did
you pay attention to what happened with
the nouns dao and the noun nft no
oh my god ralph this is insanity so
it's an nft project they release one
8-bit looks like it was created by
nintendo back in the 80s 8-bit graphic
they release one a day every day forever
so it'll take them 27 years to get to
the 10 000 number which has sort of
become the magic number so up until that
point it'll be the most scarce of these
kind of
nfts and the way that the dao was
structured so dao for anybody that
doesn't know is a decentralized
autonomous organization so
you uh
every day one of the noun cells the
buyers of the nouns go into the nouns
dao 100 of the proceeds from the sale of
these little um
8-bit graphics
go into the dow and then the members of
the dao control what's done without
money
the first one sold for
i might i might be off a little but it
was like
1.8 million dollars as of that time in
terms of the number of eats that it sold
for
and so i was like uh
this is a company overnight like you
literally sold essentially a flag
and in selling the flag on day one
raised almost two million dollars and on
day two we'll raise you know however
many because obviously the number will
go down people are going to pay the most
for the first one
but
when you think about having to go the
old model of having to go to sandhill
road in san francisco to hawk your wares
and convince somebody that you were
worth investing in and to raise two
million dollars of seed capital like was
you had to put this massive prospectus
together and like do all this crazy
stuff and really have this vision and
know how to pitch and know people and i
mean just that would have taken a lot
and now
it's an 8-bit graphic
and
the the structure of the dow and that's
it and i was like a company just came
into existence
like that yeah i mean we did similar
real vision
but not as
that's much more advanced
we never raised money and i don't know
over the history of real estate we've
probably raised 50 million in capital
over time
and we raised it only from our members
whoa
never not a single vc not a sink nothing
no strategics nobody our members
um so they're the owners of real vision
along with us
which is fabulous so that's this
community idea i believe in it
passionately because i live it with real
vision because people are passionate
about what we're doing
but then when you say this i mean
yeah i mean people are setting up downs
which is basically a rules-based
organization
or an economy or country exactly what i
talked about it's it's controlling a
group of people
in a way that they agree the rules they
set the rules
they do it they all economically benefit
and it can happen like that and you sell
a piece of digital
nothing
that has scarcity that but the community
buys into
i mean
where is this going to go there'll be a
bunch of copycats and they'll all and
they'll fail because people don't
believe in the scarcity whatever it is
but this is a change of everything
because in exchange for let's say
starting up a company let's say that dow
is actually going to become
a publishing company
but you can't raise money for a
publishing company so you say we will
sell
these tokens
that are super
valuable because we're going to restrain
the supply and they're kind of cool
and we'll sell those
and that's what you're buying into and
that company will now be in existence to
do whatever it wants that's
groundbreaking that's the end of vcs and
that's what people don't understand all
of this is going away the bankers
the vcs
the private equity
everybody in the middle of this equation
the people like google and facebook who
monetize your community in my community
and make more money out of it than we
will
that goes away
because we have direct relationships
with our community because they're token
holders
and the community benefits because they
make money out of that because you're
stripping out middlemen and the money
goes back into the value of the network
so
yeah i mean it's and this is i'm talking
quite a lot about this right now and i
get a lot of people going i don't quite
get my head around it because people are
still trying to get their head around
the digital asset space but this is even
bigger
because you won't even know it's crypto
in the end it's just like your
membership points to
communities that you're part of and
you'll realize that you're part of these
nations and it might be the nation of
rihanna
and you might be there for 20 years
it is it is a sea change that
is
it's almost impossible to recognize how
big it is
and how foundational of a change this is
going to be like um i don't know how
much you know about my story and why i'm
doing all this but
i'm going to use this very principle to
completely disrupt
entertainment and so
looking at
so when we found it we found it about
four and a half years ago and
my message to the team was hey guys
we're looking for two things we're
looking for
a platform moment so that we can capture
a lot of the economics and then we're
looking for a moment of tremendous
disruption so that we can take advantage
of that because i'm trying to build the
next disney so when you look at disney
90-year head start
they've got however many billions of
dollars in revenue plus just the the
catalog of ip they have is is daunting
so if you're trying to build the next
one and you're being intellectually
honest you look at that and go okay i'm
at a such a severe disadvantage
for me to really make ground i'm going
to need to move faster on a new idea
than they do and leverage that to get
some sort of early momentum
and so i said our job because this is a
creative endeavor we're going to fail 19
out of 20 times that's just sort of the
rough math when you look at music film
all that stuff so our job is to stay in
business long enough to find those two
things and so we were you know
hiring slowly and we had good revenue
growth
but you know i was really thought
throttling the the growth of the company
and then
when we
we found our platform which i'll i'll be
disclosing in the probably about six
months and then we are capitalizing on
the
the blockchain and so now all of a
sudden we're in a frenzy and i'm hiring
people as fast as i can find the right
people so in you know whatever four and
a half years we brought on 27 people in
the next
two months we'll bring on 10 more and so
you know when you take that out over a
year it's like we'll double the size of
the company in you know 12 to 18 months
and
it's because of that thesis that you
just walked us through of how
tokenization is going to change
everything how the economies of
community are going to change everything
because
one of the main things that i look at is
anime and so i started traveling to
japan and talking to the biggest names
over there and they're like oh there are
some years where we don't make money and
i'm like i'm sorry what and they're like
it's becoming a global phenomenon at the
same time as it's becoming impossible to
make money on so it's this really weird
thing where you're like okay there's all
this pent-up demand and enthusiasm
and yet nobody understands how to deal
with the economics
and i think what we're going through
right now with the blockchain
tokenization
bringing the community into the value
structure of that like imagine that you
can bet on whether it's the next rihanna
whether it's the next anime phenomenon
like there's for people that aren't
familiar with that world there's one so
normally anime starts as manga so
there's this one manga called demon
slayer which
that one title outsells the entire
western comic market
and so spider-man superman wonder woman
batman all of it outsold by demon slayer
so
you look at that and go
okay what if i could have bet on that
when like the first episode of the manga
came out let alone the fact that during
the pandemic that was like the highest
grossing movie
it may have been the highest grossing
movie globally it certainly was the
highest grossing movie in japan it was
one of the highest in the us
and
if i could have made that bet when i
read the first chapter of the manga
and owned some of that
ip oh my god like now all of a sudden
you have like these what start is micro
communities who are passionate about a
creator uh songwriter a singer whatever
a photographer you love the photography
of these rock stars right just you see a
photographer before somebody else right
this just happened with um justin
aversano i believe in twin flames um
and
when you own a piece of that like it's
it is insane now they're very high risk
and so you have to be super smart about
it but whoa it's going to be life
changing a manga or photographer is
going to change somebody's life and also
you know i've been taking i'm also doing
something on the side
building a whole studio business based
around
uh communities
um working with the world's largest
communities and this is all very below
the radar screen still so i can't talk
about too much
but building token economics and token
communities for the world's largest
communities
and then you start realizing stuff like
okay
an up-and-coming music artist
right to to go into the recording studio
cost money they have to pay their pet
back to the record label blah blah blah
but what happens if they've got
50 000 fans
and the fans can hear 10 pieces of music
and can back
the
ip
to own a token of the ip for the first
year so now they're betting on which
song's going to be successful
so let's say they're super fans they
then go on to tiktok and they start
creating videos with the soundtrack and
they make it viral
right this is the network effects the
recording artist now doesn't have to
borrow money
to pay
because their fans want to invest in it
and
the recording artist will probably be
still better off
because of how the economics work so
yeah all of this is coming it's
interesting to see you know gary
vaynerchuk is going down the same route
i had a long chat with him the other day
um we're seeing the um
the um
aston kushner thing coming up as well
the stoner cats and again people have
got similar ideas of creating large
entertainment brands starting from the
scarcity of the nft and building out
from that who knows what the business
model is going to be that will prevail
but i think you're dead right
but also disney's going to tokenize too
without question it is because the value
of that community is worth more than the
value of disney itself
no doubt
yeah it is uh it is a mad scramble to
you know be first and to do it better
the only good news in the area that i'm
in and and this is now so
anybody watching this in the nft
community i will just tell you
you have to switch the mentality from
what's new which like there was so much
there is so much enthusiasm in nfts
right now that it was just all too easy
to just buy things they were new they
were new they were new
and most of them you know stagnate or
drop and over the long run though it's
not going to be enough to launch another
new project like you've really got to
say
as a buyer as a collector even as an
investor you have to say okay there's
only a few projects that i can really
understand well enough to be an
intelligent investor especially if i'm
trying to time the market
and so now it's going to switch to well
wait a second i'm invested in this these
seven projects let's say i need to go
and be a part of that community that
breathes life into this and gets this
moving if for no other reason than to
protect my investment so now you start
thinking okay wait like i want to be
deep on certain niches so that a i can
be a meaningful community member i can
be a voice in the community and that i
can make sure that these projects have
real legs because ultimately especially
when you're dealing with art if there's
no emotional resonance with the
community you don't have anything so it
was just a quick flip and then people
moved on to the next thing
and so i am really going to be
interested in one watching the energy
change in that space and two trying to
be a part of the vanguard of people that
change the energy in that space and then
see what comes out of it the next five
to ten years would be
utterly fascinating you know i can't be
more excited about where nfts
communities and all of this is going
what i do know is i don't know where
it's going you and i might think we have
an idea
but it's probably going to be bigger and
the use case is more extraordinary that
we can get our heads around now we're
all struggling to get our heads around
dows but this is just the start so
it's an amazing opportunity both from a
business perspective you and i as
entrepreneurs are seeing this going oh
my god as investors we're getting really
excited about the opportunity to create
returns from investments and then you
know i think we both share this mission
that we can also bring everybody else
along with us and help change people's
lives get them into this
mindset that they can own assets and
they can make money and not everything's
against them the system's not
stacked against them here's the
opportunity everybody's waiting for so i
mean
what an amazing point in time
no doubt so one thing that i really want
to get your take on is when i look at
some of these projects they do look a
bit like they would fail the how we test
so when we think about securities and
the sec
uh how do you think about
nfts and dows and that stuff through
that framework i've been thinking a lot
about this i think the howie test pisses
me off to start with
this whole securities what is a security
you know
it's why
because therefore you will put it if
it's a security then it has to go back
through wall street
you're putting it back into those people
with power if it's not a security it's
not it's distributed
and there's something wrong with that
there's something wrong with using a
1930s law
there's something wrong with saying
what people can and can't do
in terms of investment so allowing those
with more money to do more
i that's something fundamentally wrong
and i think that the power of 86 million
millennials coming in the voting
population
um and further into power will force
that change
because if not they're voting against
themselves so it is coming i believe
change will come you know there's a
great book called the fourth turning by
um neil how and william strauss cannot
recommend it enough
it's about this demographic change and
what it does and the changes that are
coming this is all part of that
so
yes there will be prosecutions yes
people will get it wrong
it will hold back the space
but over time
the regulators and the authorities will
have to
agree that the world has changed that
what we thought of as security is not
security now
should we try and protect people against
scams
yes
how to do that
that's probably a different set of
regulations and i don't really know if
that's what you want to do is to stop
fraud and people getting
money extracted from them
then focus on that
don't focus on what you can invest in
what you can't and hope that somebody's
got a million dollars
is more able to choose what's a good
project
than a
student straight out of mit with three
master's degrees and a phd who happens
to be age 22 and doesn't have a million
dollars it's ridiculous it's just simply
ridiculous so it will change and it's
going to be frustrating and we have to
be careful so many of these projects
will start on smaller scale than
we'd want them to be
just because we need to get through this
regulated regulatory issue regulators
are so far behind they're still trying
to figure out how to deal with bitcoin
etfs
that haven't even got to defy and they
haven't looked at nfts and then when we
get to the social stuff i mean they
haven't started so they're going to
struggle really to figure this out
yes
raul thank you so much for being such a
voice in the space and for coming on the
show today i mean really really
incredible where can people spend more
time with you yes so i'm on twitter a
reasonable amount um so at raul
r-a-o-u-l-g-m-i
i just urge everybody to go to the real
vision crypto realvisioncrypto.com
or realvision.com forward slash crypto
wherever you want to find it
it's free you just give an email and
there's tons of information everything
you want to learn go off the deep end
and you'll come out the other side with
a part of this space that resonates with
you
and that little seed will change your
life
so
and i did it on purpose that it's free
so make use of it there's no excuse not
to
i love it dude thank you again so much
guys trust me this is somebody that uh
if you're going to invest in your future
this is exactly where you want to start
i've spent an obscene amount of time
taking in his content uh it is wildly
informative and speaking of things that
are wildly informative if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care peace
[Music]
you